	ANSYS 'Research-associate license agreement'

	Report:			    I. / 1990
	Licensee:	      Hahn-Schickard-Institut für Mikro- und Informationstechnik (prior FFMU e.V.)
					        Roggenbachstraße 6, D-7730 VS-Villingen
	Agreement no.:	08424
	Programversion:	ANSYS 4.4
	Computer:			  DECstation 3100, ULTRIX 3.0



General:
Besides a PC-386 university version the Hahn-Schickard-Institut uses the ANSYS Workstation 
version for solving large FE-problems. The current installation on the DECstation (4000 wavefront, 
130 MB swapspace, 16 MB RAM) runs approximately 6-10 times faster then on a PC-386.


In the field of microtechnics (sensor and actuator design) the following problems are especially 
to be considered:

1.)	anisotropic elastic behaviour of crystalline materials like silicon, etc.

2.)	piezoelectric excitation of resonant quartz transducers

3.)	iterative computing of nonlinear FE-models due to temperature influence and structure nonlinearities

3.)	modelling of 3D-structures due to the anisotropic processing effects (etching) on the sensor geometries

4.)	coupling of fields: thermal induced stress, piezoelectric and electrostatic coupling

Optimizing of structures:
We used the workstation version to calculate different FE-models by changing geometry parameters
in order to optimize the static and dynamic behaviour. Improving the dynamic behaviour 
(linearity, sensitivity and unimodality of the force-frequency-characteristic) of resonant 
force transducers could be achieved by selective changing the resonant beams geometry, the mount
geometry and the flexural vibration isolation structures. Also the static behavior of the 
whole sensor could be improved by selecting a proper force application in order to keep 
internal stresses low.


Analysis procedures:
Besides static analysis (KAN=0) of micromechanical structures (e.g. membranes, beams, cantilevers)
with pressure and force loading we examined mainly following dynamic problems:

	- modal analysis (KAN=2: Householder, Subspace-Iteration)
	- modal analysis with stress stiffening (/FREQ)
	- resonant mechanical excitation of microstructures (KAN=6)

The above mentioned analyses turned out to be efficient by using relative simple FE-models
(e.g. isotropic 2D-elements, few master degrees of freedom) to calculate the dynamic behaviour
and the coarse operating point of the sensor. The 'optimal' operating point of the sensor could 
be achieved by using larger and more complex models. 


Piezoelectric analysis:
First piezoelectric calculations (KAN=2, KAN=6) were carried out on simple sensor geometries 
on the basis of quartz. We choosed a known problem to verify the computing results by comparison
with experimental and literature data.

Th.Fabula
