Report on the ANSYS university contract
			

Reporting period: 1989-90
Licensee:		
Hahn-Schickard-Institute for Micro- and Information Technology
D-7730 VS-Villingen

Program version: ANSYS 4.4 (full version)
Computer platform: PC386 (HP Vectra RS/20)



The Hahn-Schickard Research Institute uses the FEM program system ANSYS as a development tool for the design of microsystems.
In addition to studying the finite element method, the university version is used to tackle simple problems and to ensure 
that students and scientific and scientific staff. 

The focus is on static (KAN=0) and dynamic (KAN=2, KAN=6) calculations on simple sensor and actuator structures of micromechanics, 
which, however, require the consideration of e.g. anisotropic material behavior
(STIF5, 64, 98), for example. 

The basic materials used in micromechanics are essentially silicon and silicon compounds 
(SiO2, Si3N4, etc.) and monocrystalline quartz. The material data required for modeling 
(elasticity coefficients, piezoelectric constants, etc.) are compiled and stored in a 
computerized database for later coupling with the ANSYS program. 
database for later coupling with the ANSYS program.

In the field of microtechnology, the calculation of coupled field equations plays an important role. 
Sensors/actuators are, for example, read out/excited thermally, electrostatically or piezoelectrically, so that 
the coupling of different fields (thermal structure, electro-magnetism, piezoelectricity) must be taken into account. 
Here, however, the '500 wavefront' quickly imposes a limitation on the user, so that 
only the basic procedure can be studied. The quantitative calculation runs with an 
number of elements, degrees of freedom, iterations, etc., are not available in the 
ANSYS workstation version (DECstation 3100).

Simple examples (see appendix) are the results of the calculation of a silicon pressure sensor and a 
of resonant quartz force sensor. Various FEM calculations were carried out and the results were
compared with theoretical and experimental data. Within the framework of the model assumptions 
the FEM calculations agree very well with the experimental measurements.

In the static calculations of the silicon pressure sensor, the influence of the structural geometry on the deflection 
deflection and the stress state of the silicon diaphragm is of interest. The ratios can provide information
about the arrangement of the piezoresistive components or about the electrode shapes for electrostatic 
readout. In the dynamic calculations, the natural frequencies and natural modes of vibration (modal analysis) 
and the force-frequency characteristic (force sensitivity) of the force sensor are of interest. 

Various complex FE models were created for the calculations, in which the element meshing 
conditions and material parameters were varied in order to study the influence of the model parameters. 
To simplify the calculations and save computing time, two-dimensional models with isotropic 
material behavior were chosen.

Depending on the geometry of the force sensor, different natural vibration modes were obtained as expected. 
In the natural oscillation mode, in which the double tuning fork is operated as a force sensor, the 
tuning fork webs vibrate out of phase against each other, so that no force torques are  transmitted to the mountings.
When determining the natural frequencies of the force sensor, despite the simplicity of the FE model, good agreement 
(deviation:  good agreement approx. 2%) with the measured values could be achieved.

When calculating the force-frequency characteristic curve, the sensor was successively subjected to an axial 
tensile force (KAN=0) and then the natural frequencies of the preloaded system (/FREQ run) were determined.
The linear progression of the natural frequency change (see appendix) was demonstrated. 



Th.Fabula
07/1990



Appendix: Copies of the poster presentation, MICROSYSTEM 90
